As you look back on the department in the 70s, there was strength in tectonophysics.
What were the other research areas of recognition by the A&M Department of Geology?
Probably petroleum, reservoir, what we call reservoir characterization, description of the reservoirs, which of course leads to other things involved.
Who were the key people in those specialties?
I was.
Okay.
And several other people who came.
So there were a number of us.
Geographically, where were you all doing?
What areas were you studying?
Anyplace.
All over the world?
All over the United States.
You know what cores look like?
I was looking at some stuff this morning.
In California, I described it.
on a consulting basis and interpreted about 2,000 feet in the southern San Joaquin Basin.
And the Delaware Basin in West Texas, another 2,000 feet there.
And probably another 5,000 feet adding up everything from Montana to Mississippi and mostly Texas.
So we've processed a lot of rock.
And so this research that you've mentioned so far I as an outsider would describe as real world applied geology.
Yes.
Was that general throughout the entire department?
No.
The older group of faculty didn't do any research.
Okay.
of course they published multiple papers.
And I hired Chris Mathewson, I think about 1970.
We looked for, and this was Earl Cook's
He saw engineering geology, which is the geology of shallow structures, bridges and tunnels and all that stuff.
And we started to interview some people, and some of the best ones that were consulting were having a heyday in this business.
They wouldn't even consider coming back back then.
So, as a substitute, we hired Chris Matteson, who went on a Ph.D.
I've got to say, he did a remarkable job over the years in building up an engineering-geology group with several people working with him, cooperation with civil engineering.
And so that would be the other promise I'd call it.
We call it engineering-geology.
I know you could call it environmental.
Oh, OK. OK.
All right.
Do you remember in the 70s and 80s any research proposal approval that caused all of y'all to celebrate that this was really a big one?
No, I really don't.
You don't remember?
They were all pretty big.
Is that right?
What would have been in the 70s the average departmental research budget total?
A million or more?
Must have been over a million.
And the enrollment, what happened to the enrollment, undergraduate and graduate?
Well, enrollment began to increase after I got here.
And hiring increased.
And of course, after the Arab embargo, things ballooned.
Price increased.
a lot more exploration.
And that lasted until about 1986, when the crisis stopped.
And in the boom years, it was really terrible.
In the early 80s, at one point, we had 300 freshmen, declared freshmen.
And we didn't know what to do with the whole group.
So we started a little seminar.
Everybody took a couple hours.
went in and told some aspect of geology.
Of course, I did professional practice.
Then the subject of salaries came up, and I hear that's a mob of people.
I think there were 300 total enrolled, 90 majors, 90 freshmen.
So I had to look out to see freshmen.
I said, how many of you are registered in geology because you think you're going to get a good job?
And there was a forest of hands.
I said, how many of you are here because you like rocks?
Two girls.
So it follows pretty closely.
In those years, what were the key undergraduate courses that a geology major took?
There must have been some that were kind of the gateway courses where that
They either stayed with it after that or decided to go somewhere else.
Well, the second year course is mineralogy.
It's always kind of the elimination course.
Students can come in and take the freshman in the beginning geology, historical geology, physical and historical.
But in the next year, they have to get into the crystallography and
And that wipes out a good number of my students.
And we de-emphasize that now that it used to be a very major part of the curriculum.
Who taught that second course?
Who taught those introductory sections the first year?
The older faculty primarily.
Was there any of them that was supposedly legendary, according to the students in their teaching?
Yeah, Fred Smith.
Yeah, Fred was...
Did the students have a nickname for him?
You know, there were legendary nicknames.
I was wondering if there might have been in the
Surely there are too many possibilities in geology.
There must have been.
You said the enrollment tended to follow the market, the oil market, so that you're implying that most of the geology students saw this as petroleum-related.
Yes, or job opportunities.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Looking back over these 30 years plus that you've been here, which corporations have been most positive in their support of the geology program at Texas A&M?
Oh, that's a tough one.
I can only speak from my own research.
Tentacle was my major support.
And I like the way they operate.
I like their organization.
I taught short courses from them.
I did a lot of consulting.
They're present, of course, with Maggie, Jill Foster.
So for me, that was the mainstay of my research.
But there must have been others you can think of that supported.
There were a number of others.
Yeah, I taught short courses either out lecturing or here.
They were one-week courses.
They went through my whole core collection.
All right.
Quite popular.
And finally I opened.
I started with the Teneca.
I started with the Chevron.
But then it became largely a Teneca course.
Finally I left it open.
I had mobile courses.
What was your favorite course to teach?
What were they?
One was called Stratigraphy, but it really was the geology of reservoir sandstone.
And the second course was Petroleum Geology.
The students who took these were normally what level academically?
Graduate students.
And what was your intent in those courses?
What were you hoping to do?
What were you hoping to?
Well, I guess I really hoped that I could train them to do work involved with it.
It's rather rare.
Well, you can't do that at the undergraduate level, right?
But at the graduate level, you can start specializing.
I introduced a lot of petroleum engineering into my petroleum geology course so that my students had no trouble conversing with a petroleum engineer and knowing what the problems were, at least in production of petroleum.
And that was the goal of mine, to try to integrate the geology, geophysics, with the petroleum engineering, which we finally ended up having big projects funded by DOE.
That kind of presents that with petroleum engineering.
Describe those projects.
Did you know Steve Poston was a petroleum engineer?
now retired.
This one was called Low Production from a Low Firm in Jody Rock, having him around.
The boom on Austin Shaw, which I said previously was really going in the 80s, early 80s.
So we chopped up the study into several pieces.
I had, of course, the rock.
The these students were masters usually or and
Did the, you mentioned the relationship with geophysics and petroleum engineering.
During the years here, your years here, have those relationships always been friendly?
Yes, I'd say so.
With me personally, they have been.
I'd no sooner been on the campus for a few days than I met Bob Weidner.
Alright, would that be one of the primary lines of demarcation between petroleum engineering and geology?
Rocks and liquid?
All right, then what about geophysics?
Okay.
Oh, okay, okay.
In these courses that you taught, normally about how many students per semester?
In the boom years, I went as high as 65.
Wow.
All right, what about the down years?
And where did these students get their undergraduate degrees usually?
Well, not so much now, because I had less contact with students a few years ago.
And when did you begin to get international students?
Well, I think also in the 80s.
From what parts of the world?
China.
China?
They're all over the place.
Were they here sent by the government, or did they come on their own?
Those that were sent by the government got such a fitness to live on that they have to have some other kind of support.
Either they had personal money or some small grants from the department and so on.
Describe those Chinese students in terms of their ability and their motivation.
Well, it ranged just like all of the students.
Is that right?
Yeah, I had one of my most recent ones.
He was a Ph.D.
He was 47 years old.
And he died last year of a heart attack.
But he was great.
And he had heard about me and had gone to high school with a couple of other guys who had been here and got their degree.
And so he was a dedicated student.
He was Taiwan.
And the Taiwan, the China Petroleum Corporation sent him back to study in London for a year.
I mean, that's a well-known song.
Anyway, they range.
Did these Chinese students tend to all go back to Taiwan or to mainland China?
Do you remember any anecdotes about how hardworking they were or how lost they might be or anything?
How many doctoral students have you directed?
How many total?
111.
And among those doctoral students, what would be your guesstimate now as to how many of those are in academia and how many of them in the real world of economic geology?
They all went into economics.
Okay.
They may have taught for a while.
But they...
All right, now you served as department head how long?
Five years.
Five years, all right.
Describe the department when you left the department head job.
You've already talked about what it was when you got here.
Describe it when you left it.
Well, it was still a growing department, but carrying on good research, a lot of research.
But I was very proud.
About how many faculty when you left as department head?
The head counted about 25.
Okay.
So it tripled?
Yes.
Oh, okay, okay.
The College of Engineering, I mean, excuse me, the College of Geosciences, led by Earl Cook in the 70s.
Let's go back to campus leadership.
Mr. Rutter dies unexpectedly in 1970.
And we have an interim president, and then Jack Williams becomes the president.
Did you and the geology department, did those changes at the top make any difference to y'all?
I don't think so.
All right.
And Dr. Byers was then the vice president of academic affairs.
Can you think of anything special that Dr. Byers did for geology?
But y'all certainly didn't suffer with him there.
No, but we were not favored with any particular grants.
It was a big push.
Let me tell you one thing.
We talked about enrollment a few minutes ago.
In the outside course, in the beginning courses, we're teaching almost 1,300 students a semester.
It just means that we have to load up with all these labs, laboratory assistants, and so on.
But that's a great help.
And I would assume that that would be, in general, a satisfying activity.
Because those students, I presume, would be from all over the campus in their majors.
When did women, when did co-eds begin to start taking geology courses in sizable numbers?
Well, within a year after I came here, we had at least three women, I'd say, enrolled undergraduates.
And the reason was Fred Smith.
He went and got several NSF grants, science for secondary school students.
And they came on the campus, what, three weeks?
And you had field trips organized and all kinds of things.
A large number, and they were all highly selected and kind of their, what do you call it, national honors.
And many of those students came back and enrolled here.
do you remember any pioneer female graduate students a doctoral student or anything was there do you remember a
One girl, she was in the prostitutes, she came from Giddings.
Her father was a mechanic, auto mechanic in Giddings, and he had nine children and a family.
And, you know, I don't know how they put her, she was good.
Long later comes her brother, she was a physicist.
Both of them had done very well.
When I was an undergraduate at Austin College, we did our geology field lab up in the Arbuckle Mountains in Oklahoma.
Then at Missouri, I learned that they have a big field lab in the summer near Lander, Wyoming.
Where does A&M geology students, where do they do any field work?
They have a floating field camp.
They start out saying...
And they used to then end up
along what's called the Book Cliffs in Utah, Colorado, and maybe even up at Fort Astor, Marble Convent, so that they get a variety of field experience.
Back to the...
back to the seventies dr buyers retires and john calhoun becomes the vice president for academic affairs as a world-class petroleum engineer i presume that you all didn't suffer at all from uh... his feeling uh... but geology was important
But you also didn't, there wasn't any loss of anything, was there?
No.
Calhoun became dean of geosciences for about a year.
Yeah, yeah.
Did you ever work with him, with Calhoun?
Describe Calhoun's personality and work style.
He was always nervous, right?
You know, I've written, if you've read some of what I've written, I like the NERI, NERI's description.
John was a genius at building, and he could visualize what would happen.
He started an academic program, and he said, oh yeah, we could do a research program, or vice versa.
And of course, every one of those ideas, somebody had to look into them and see if it worked well, and so it was NERI who made it.
And then...
I think I may have been in the room when that was said at least once.
Nate you became director of research when do you remember?
70 so you and I then joined his staff at about the same time And did you continue teaching doing any research during it?
That's what I thought Now during that
As you look back on the 70s, the early 70s, Williams and Calhoun, what do you think about the university's progress during that time?
I don't know.
Research was increasing, so everything was going great.
See, I believe that Rutter laid the foundation and Williams built on it and that nobody but Rutter could have done what he did because he wasn't vulnerable to political difficulties.
but that he could not have built academically what Williams did and vice versa.
And that Williams and Calhoun worked well together.
And I may be biased here, but I think that they put together a pretty good team there.
All right, then Dr. Williams dies.
Calhoun resigns.
Dr. Miller becomes president.
How long did you stay in the...
I did to 83.
To 83.
That's when I got the chair.
Now, how did things change in terms of your task?
Did they change under Dr. Miller or following him?
No.
I had a little...
Let's see, you mentioned the Winerdi saying to Calhoun, it's like juggling plates in the air.
Do you remember any other incidents or examples of those years?
Oh, yeah, I remember a lot.
Well, share some of them.
This is Richard E. Winerdi, W-A-I-N-E-R-D-I.
He was going to be on leave attached to the National Science Foundation.
We had to have a contract and so on.
And when Ernie came rushing into my office one day, he threw down this stuff around my desk and said, we've got to have a contract done.
And I said, well, it's being signed by NSF and I can't do anything until they sign it.
He said, yeah, but we don't know right now what to do.
So I thought, who do I know at NSF?
He was there attached to oceanography.
So I called Vian and I said, I want to know about this contract.
He said, I just saw it this morning.
It got signed.
It went past.
I said, okay, can you get a copy of that for me?
And he said, yeah, he's in oceanography.
He said, they had a fax machine.
Now, not very many people have fax machines.
So when Ernie had come into my office about 11.30 that morning, by 1.30 I had a copy of the contract.
And I waited until he got back from lunch, and I soldered into his office and threw this paper on the desk and said, here's a copy of that contract.
He saw that it had been signed that day in Washington.
So...
He said, how'd you do this?
I said, I'm not going to tell you.
And that's about it.
He figured it out.
I think they never mentioned him.
I had a lot of fun.
To me, one of the thrills of those years was that I think without saying so to anyone, we felt we were part of an organization that was moving.
There was motion.
There was progress.
Now, you reported to Calhoun, but you looked at research all across the campus.
I'm not going to ask the negative.
With which parts of the campus was it easiest to work?
Which units?
Who were the most...
He really should.
You asked that question negatively.
You were the hardest he had gone with.
Well, no, I was asking the positive.
Well, let's start on some of them.
Harry Kunkel, he was a great guy.
I don't know.
He had a lot of control over there, but he still was very cooperative.
He would do anything he wanted.
He would help the system.
Fred Benson, of course, was at odds with Galloway all the time.
Everything.
I don't think they agreed on anything.
So it was a little bit different for Fred.